How and when to take empagliflozin Brand name: Jardiance
Always follow the instructions from your doctor.
Taking empagliflozin tablets
Empagliflozin tablets come in strengths of 10mg or 25mg.
The usual starting dose for diabetes is 10mg, taken once a day. Your doctor may increase your dose to 25mg taken once a day.
The usual dose for heart failure or chronic kidney disease is 10mg once a day.
You can take it any time of day, either with or without food. Just try to take it at the same time each day.
Swallow the tablets whole with a drink of water. Do not chew them.
Taking empagliflozin with metformin (Synjardy)
There are 4 different strengths of Synjardy. Each tablet contains 5mg or 12.5mg of empagliflozin and 850mg or 1g of metformin. Your doctor will prescribe the right strength of tablet for you.
The usual dose is 1 tablet, taken twice a day.
Swallow the tablets whole with a drink of water. Do not chew them.
It's a good idea to take your medicine with food. This means the metformin is less likely to upset your stomach.
Taking empagliflozin with linagliptin (Glyxambi)
There are 2 strengths of Glyxambi. Each tablet contains 5mg of linagliptin, and either 10mg or 25mg of empagliflozin.
The usual dose is 1 tablet, taken once a day.
Swallow the tablets whole with a drink of water. Do not chew them.
You can take it any time of day, either with or without food. Just try to take it at the same time each day.
How long to take it for
Treatment for diabetes, heart failure or chronic kidney disease is usually for life. Do not stop taking your empagliflozin tablets without talking to your doctor first.
If you stop taking it suddenly your condition may get worse.
If this medicine is not working for you or you're bothered by side effects, speak to your doctor. They may be able to recommend another medicine to treat your condition.
If you forget to take it
If you miss a dose, what to do depends on which type of tablets you're taking.
If you miss a dose of empagliflozin or empagliflozin with linagliptin (Glyxambi) and it's 12 hours or more until your next dose, take it as soon as you remember. Then take your next dose at the usual time.
If it's less than 12 hours until your next dose, skip the missed dose. Then take your next dose at the usual time.
If you miss a dose of empagliflozin with metformin (Synjardy), take it as soon as you remember, unless it's only a few hours until your next dose. In this case skip the forgotten dose and take your next dose at the usual time.
Do not take 2 doses to make up for a missed dose.
If you forget doses often, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You could also ask a pharmacist for advice on other ways to help you remember to take your medicine.
If you take too much
An overdose of empagliflozin can cause low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia) . Symptoms include feeling hungry, trembling or shaking, sweating, confusion and difficulty concentrating.
If you think you have low blood sugar, have some food or drink that quickly gets sugar into your bloodstream (like sugar cubes or fruit juice).
This type of sugar will not stay in your blood for long. You may also need to eat a starchy carbohydrate, like a sandwich or a couple of biscuits.
Contact 111 for advice now if:
you take more than your prescribed dose of empagliflozin
Go to 111.nhs.uk or call 111
If you need to go to A&E , do not drive. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.
Bring the empagliflozin packet or leaflet inside it, any remaining medicine, and any other medicines you take.
More in Empagliflozin
Page last reviewed: 2 February 2023 Next review due: 2 February 2026