How and when to take gliclazide
Gliclazide comes as standard tablets and slow-release tablets.
Standard tablets release gliclazide into your body quickly, so you may need to take them several times a day depending on your dose.
Slow-release tablets release gliclazide into your body slowly, which means you do not have to take them as often. One dose in the morning is usually enough.
Dosage and strength
Doses of gliclazide can vary. Take this medicine as prescribed by your doctor.
The maximum daily dose for standard gliclazide is 320mg. If you need to take more than 160mg a day, it should be divided into 2 equal doses.
For slow-release gliclazide, the maximum daily dose is 120mg.
Changes to your dose
Your doctor will check your blood sugar levels regularly and may change your dose of gliclazide if necessary.
How to take it
Swallow your gliclazide tablets whole with a drink of water. Do not chew them.
If you are taking 2 doses a day, take 1 dose with your breakfast and 1 dose with your evening meal.
If you are taking slow-release gliclazide, take your dose once a day with breakfast.
How long to take it for
Treatment for diabetes is usually for life. Do not stop taking your gliclazide tablets without talking to your doctor. If you stop taking gliclazide suddenly, your diabetes may get worse.
Gliclazide is safe to take for a long time. There's no evidence it harms your pancreas or your general health. However, it may stop working properly after a while, so your doctor may want to stop it or add a different medicine to help keep your blood sugar level stable.
If you forget to take it
If you miss a dose of gliclazide, skip the missed dose and take the next dose at the usual time.
Do not take 2 doses to make up for a forgotten dose.
If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you. You could also ask your pharmacist for advice on other ways to help you remember to take your medicine.
If you take too much
Contact 111 for advice now if:
you take more than your prescribed dose of gliclazide – an overdose of gliclazide can cause low blood sugar
Get help from 111 online or call 111
If you need to go to A&E , do not drive. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.
Bring the gliclazide packet or leaflet inside it, any remaining medicine, and any other medicines you take.
More in Gliclazide
Page last reviewed: 24 March 2022 Next review due: 24 March 2025