Pregnancy, breastfeeding and fertility while taking empagliflozin Brand name: Jardiance
Empagliflozin and pregnancy
Empagliflozin is not recommended in pregnancy as there is little information about whether it could affect the baby. Other medicines used to treat diabetes, such as insulin and metformin , are safe to take during pregnancy.
If you take empagliflozin and are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, talk to your doctor. They will need to review your treatment and may suggest different medicine that is more suitable to take in pregnancy.
Empagliflozin and breastfeeding
Empagliflozin is not usually recommended while you're breastfeeding as it's not known how much passes into breast milk, but it's likely to be a small amount.
It's possible that empagliflozin could lower your baby's blood sugar level and could affect the way their kidneys develop and grow, although this has not been proven.
Speak to your doctor about what's best for you and your baby. They will need to review your treatment and may be able to suggest an alternative medicine for you, particularly while you're breastfeeding a newborn or premature baby.
If your doctor says it's OK to take empagliflozin while breastfeeding, talk to your health visitor, midwife, doctor or pharmacist as soon as possible if you have any concerns, including if your baby:
is not feeding as well as usual
is more sleepy or drowsy
is more restless or irritable
seems hungrier or more thirsty
is peeing more than usual
Empagliflozin and fertility
There's no evidence that empagliflozin affects fertility in either men or women.
Speak to your doctor if you're trying to get pregnant as they may want to review your treatment.
Tell your doctor if you're:
trying to get pregnant
pregnant
breastfeeding
For more information about how diabetes medicines can affect you and your baby during pregnancy, visit the Best Use of Medicines in Pregnancy (BUMPS) website .
More in Empagliflozin
Page last reviewed: 2 February 2023 Next review due: 2 February 2026