Common questions about sitagliptin
How does sitagliptin work?
Sitagliptin belongs to a group of medicines called dipeptidylpeptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP-4 inhibitors) or gliptins.
It's used to treat type 2 diabetes , which is caused by problems with a hormone in your body called insulin.
Gliptins help your body make more insulin. They also stop your body releasing too much sugar (glucose) into your blood.
Both of these things help keep your blood sugar levels stable.
How long does it take to work?
Sitagliptin starts to work within a few hours.
You need to take it every day to make sure your blood sugar stays as stable as possible.
Does sitagliptin cause hypoglycaemia ("hypos")?
Sitagliptin does not usually cause low blood sugar (known as hypoglycaemia, or "hypos") when taken on its own.
If you're taking other medicines for diabetes, your doctor may recommend reducing the dose of your other medicines when you start sitagliptin.
This will reduce the risk of hypos.
Are there any long term-side effects?
Sitagliptin is safe to take for a long time. There do not seem to be any lasting harmful effects from taking it for many months or even years.
You may have seen news stories linking sitagliptin with pancreatic cancer. But there's no clear evidence that sitagliptin causes cancer.
Are there similar medicines to sitagliptin?
Sitagliptin is a dipeptidylpeptidase-4 inhibitor (DPP-4 inhibitor).
Similar medicines include:
alogliptin
linagliptin
saxagliptin
vildagliptin
There are other diabetes medicines that you also swallow, such as:
metformin
gliclazide
glimepiride
pioglitazone
canagliflozin
dapagliflozin
empagliflozin
Are there different types of diabetes medicines?
There are several medicines that can lower blood sugar:
metformin
sulfonylureas, like gliclazide
pioglitazone
DPP-4 inhibitors, like sitagliptin
SGLT2 inhibitors, like dapagliflozin
GLP-1 agonists, like exenatide (given by injection)
insulin (given by injection)
Your doctor might recommend taking more than one type of diabetes medicine at the same time.
Will I gain or lose weight?
Sitagliptin does not usually make people lose weight or put on any weight.
Can I get diabetes medicines for free?
If you have diabetes , you're entitled to free prescriptions for all of your medicines, not just your diabetes ones.
To claim your free prescriptions, you'll need to have a medical exemption certificate (FP92A).
You can get an application form at your GP surgery.
Can I take sitagliptin before surgery?
Yes, you can take sitagliptin before surgery.
Tell your surgeon that you're taking sitagliptin and any other medicines.
Will it affect my contraception?
Sitagliptin does not affect any type of contraception, including the combined pill or emergency contraception .
Can I drive or ride a bike?
If your blood sugar levels are stable, taking sitagliptin should not affect your ability to drive, cycle or use machinery and tools.
If your blood sugar levels become too low, this can reduce your concentration.
If this happens to you, do not drive, cycle or use machines or tools until you feel better.
It's an offence to drive a car if your ability to drive safely is affected. It's your responsibility to decide if it's safe to drive. If you're in any doubt, do not drive.
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist if you're unsure whether it's safe for you to drive while taking sitagliptin. GOV.UK has more information on the law on drugs and driving .
Can I drink alcohol while taking sitagliptin?
Yes, you can drink alcohol with sitagliptin. But it's best to drink no more than 2 units per day. Drinking more than this can increase your risk of low blood sugar.
Is there any food or drink I need to avoid?
It's a good idea to cut down on foods with added sugar.
Check the nutrition labels as many foods and drinks are high in sugar, such as:
sweets
cakes
biscuits
chocolate
some fizzy drinks
juice drinks
Can lifestyle changes help to control diabetes?
There are some lifestyle changes you can make to help control the symptoms of diabetes.
These include:
eating a healthy diet
losing any excess weight
not smoking
cutting down on alcohol – try to keep to the recommended guidelines of no more than 14 units of alcohol a week. A standard glass of wine (175ml) is 2 units. A pint of lager or beer is usually 2 to 3 units of alcohol
exercising – 30 minutes a day, 5 times a week is ideal
Sitagliptin is usually prescribed when diet and exercise alone have not been enough to control your blood sugar levels.
More in Sitagliptin
Page last reviewed: 11 February 2022 Next review due: 11 February 2025